.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\" First parameter, NAME, should be all caps
.\" Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.\" TeX users may be more comfortable with the \fB<whatever>\fP and
.\" \fI<whatever>\fP escape sequences to invoke bold face and italics, 
.\" respectively.
.TH IPE 1 "September 1, 2011"
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Some roff macros, for reference:
.\" .nh        disable hyphenation
.\" .hy        enable hyphenation
.\" .ad l      left justify
.\" .ad b      justify to both left and right margins
.\" .nf        disable filling
.\" .fi        enable filling
.\" .br        insert line break
.\" .sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
.\" for manpage-specific macros, see man(7)
.SH NAME
ipe \- drawing editor for creating figures in PDF or EPS formats
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ipe
[ \fIQt options\fP ] [ -sheet \fIstylesheet\fP ] \fIfilename\fP

.SH DESCRIPTION

Ipe is a program that supports making small figures for inclusion into
LaTeX documents as well as making multi-page PDF presentations.

.PP
This manual page only documents the command line options and
environment variables.  Full documentation for using Ipe can be found
in HTML and PDF format; see below.

.TP
\fB\-sheet\fR \fIstylesheet\fP
add the Ipe style sheet in the indicated file to all newly created Ipe
documents.  This option can be used more than once.

.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES

Ipe respects the following environment variables:

.TP
\fBIPELATEXDIR\fP
the directory where Ipe runs Pdflatex.

.TP
\fBIPELATEXPATH\fP
the directory containing pdflatex and xelatex.  If not set, they are
searched for on the path.

.TP
\fBIPELETPATH\fP a list of directories, separated by semicolons,
containing ipelets. You can write a single underscore for the
system-wide ipelet directory. If this variable is not set, the default
consists of the system-wide ipelet directory, plus
\fI~/.ipe/ipelets\fP on Unix, plus \fI~/Library/Ipe/Ipelets\fP on OS
X.

.TP
\fBEDITOR\fP
external editor to use for editing text objects.

.TP
\fBIPESTYLES\fP a list of directories, separated by semicolons, where
Ipe looks for stylesheets. You can write a single underscore for the
system-wide stylesheet directory.  If this variable is not set, the
default consists of the system-wide stylesheet directory, plus
\fI~/.ipe/styles\fP on Unix, plus \fI~/Library/Ipe/Styles\fP on OS X.

.TP
\fBIPEDEBUG\fP
set this to 1 for debugging output.

.TP
\fBIPEDOCDIR\fP
the directory containing the Ipe documentation.

.TP
\fBIPEICONDIR\fP directory containing icons for the Ipe user
interface.

.TP
\fBIPELUAPATH\fP
path for searching for Ipe Lua code.

.SH AUTHOR
Otfried Cheong

.SH REPORTING BUGS
.ad l
Please report bugs using Ipe bugzilla at
.I "http://ipe.otfried.org/bugzilla.html"

.SH SEE ALSO
.ad l
Ipe is documented fully in
.IR "The Ipe Manual" ,
which is available online at
.I "http://ipe.otfried.org/manual/manual.html" .
