.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\" First parameter, NAME, should be all caps
.\" Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.\" TeX users may be more comfortable with the \fB<whatever>\fP and
.\" \fI<whatever>\fP escape sequences to invode bold face and italics, 
.\" respectively.
.TH IPERENDER 1 "June 27, 2009"
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Some roff macros, for reference:
.\" .nh        disable hyphenation
.\" .hy        enable hyphenation
.\" .ad l      left justify
.\" .ad b      justify to both left and right margins
.\" .nf        disable filling
.\" .fi        enable filling
.\" .br        insert line break
.\" .sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
.\" for manpage-specific macros, see man(7)
.SH NAME
iperender \- Export Ipe document as bitmap or SVG 
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B iperender
( -png | -eps | -pdf | -svg ) 
[ -page \fIpage\fP ] 
[ -view \fIview\fP ]
[ -resolution \fIdpi\fP ]
[ -transparent ]
[ -nocrop ] 
\fIinput-file\fP \fIoutput-file\fP

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
\fBiperender\fP exports an Ipe document as a PNG bitmap, as a
figure in Encapsulated Postscript (EPS), in PDF, or in SVG format.
Options are:
.TP
\fB-png\fP
export as a PNG image
.TP
\fB-eps\fP
export as an EPS figure
.TP
\fB-pdf\fP
export as a PDF figure
.TP
\fB-svg\fP
export as an SVG figure
.TP
\fB-page\fP \fIpage\fP
export this page from a multipage document.
.TP
\fB-view\fP \fIview\fP
export this view from a page with multiple views.
.TP
\fB-resolution\fP \fIdpi\fP
set resolution for exporting to PNG.
.TP
\fB-transparent\fP
make background transparent when exporting to PNG.
.TP
\fB-nocrop\fP
do not crop the page to the bounding box of the objects.

.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES

\fBiperender\fP respects the following environment variables:

.TP
\fBIPELATEXDIR\fP
the directory where \fBipetoipe\fP runs Pdflatex.
.TP
\fBIPELATEXPATH\fP
the directory containing pdflatex and xelatex.  If not set, they are
searched for on the path.
.TP
\fBIPEDEBUG\fP
set this to 1 for debugging output from \fBiperender\fP.

.SH AUTHOR
Otfried Cheong

.SH REPORTING BUGS
.ad l
Please report bugs using Ipe bugzilla at
.I "http://ipe.otfried.org/bugzilla.html"

.SH SEE ALSO
.ad l
Ipe is documented fully in
.IR "The Ipe Manual" ,
which is available online at
.I "http://ipe.otfried.org/manual/manual.html" .
