.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\" First parameter, NAME, should be all caps
.\" Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.\" TeX users may be more comfortable with the \fB<whatever>\fP and
.\" \fI<whatever>\fP escape sequences to invode bold face and italics, 
.\" respectively.
.TH IPESCRIPT 1 "August 28, 2011"
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Some roff macros, for reference:
.\" .nh        disable hyphenation
.\" .hy        enable hyphenation
.\" .ad l      left justify
.\" .ad b      justify to both left and right margins
.\" .nf        disable filling
.\" .fi        enable filling
.\" .br        insert line break
.\" .sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
.\" for manpage-specific macros, see man(7)
.SH NAME
ipescript \- Run an Ipe script (written in Lua)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ipescript
\fIscript\fP
{ \fIarguments\fP }

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
\fBipescript\fP runs an Ipe script written in Lua.  The Ipe bindings
are automatically available in the script.  Ipescript looks for the
script in any of the script directories.

.PP
The \fIscript\fP argument should not contain the .lua extension.

.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES

\fBipescript\fP respects the following environment variables:

.TP
\fBIPELATEXDIR\fP
the directory where \fBipetoipe\fP runs Pdflatex.
.TP
\fBIPELATEXPATH\fP
the directory containing pdflatex and xelatex.  If not set, they are
searched for on the path.
.TP
\fBIPESCRIPTS\fP a list of directories where Ipescript will look for
scripts.  When this variable is not set, Ipe searches first the
current directory, then \fI~/.ipe/scripts\fP, and finally the
system-wide Ipe script directory.  When this variable is set, it
should contain a list of directories, separated by semicolons.  A
single underscore is replaced by the system-wide Ipe script directory.
.TP
\fBIPEDEBUG\fP
set this to 1 for debugging output from \fBipescript\fP.

.SH AUTHOR
Otfried Cheong

.SH REPORTING BUGS
.ad l
Please report bugs using Ipe bugzilla at
.I "http://ipe.otfried.org/bugzilla.html"

.SH SEE ALSO
.ad l
Ipe is documented fully in
.IR "The Ipe Manual" ,
which is available online at
.I "http://ipe.otfried.org/manual/manual.html" .
