.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\" First parameter, NAME, should be all caps
.\" Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.\" TeX users may be more comfortable with the \fB<whatever>\fP and
.\" \fI<whatever>\fP escape sequences to invode bold face and italics, 
.\" respectively.
.TH IPETOIPE 1 "June 27, 2009"
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Some roff macros, for reference:
.\" .nh        disable hyphenation
.\" .hy        enable hyphenation
.\" .ad l      left justify
.\" .ad b      justify to both left and right margins
.\" .nf        disable filling
.\" .fi        enable filling
.\" .br        insert line break
.\" .sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
.\" for manpage-specific macros, see man(7)
.SH NAME
ipetoipe \- Convert between Ipe file formats
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ipetoipe
( -pdf | -xml ) { options } \fIinput-file\fP [ \fIoutput-file\fP ]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
\fBipetoipe\fP converts between the two Ipe file formats XML and PDF.
Options are:
.TP
\fB-pdf\fP
convert to PDF format
.TP
\fB-xml\fP
convert to XML format
.TP
\fB-export\fP
do not include Ipe markup in the output file.
.br
\fIWarning:\fP this means that Ipe will not be able to read the
resulting output file. 
.TP
\fB-pages\fP \fIfrom\fP-\fIto\fP
restrict exporting to PDF to this page range.  This implies  the
\fB-export\fP option. 
.TP
\fB-view\fP \fIpage\fP-\fIview\fP
only export this single view from the document.  This implies  the
\fB-export\fP option. 
.TP
\fB-markedview\fP
create a PDF page only for the marked views of marked Ipe pages. This
is for instance convenient for making handouts for slides used in 
a presentation. This implies the
\fB-export\fP option. 
.TP
\fB-runlatex\fP
run Latex even for XML output. This has the effect of including the
dimensions of each text object in the XML file.
.TP
\fB-nozip\fP
do not compress streams in PDF or Postscript output.

.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES

\fBipetoipe\fP respects the following environment variables:

.TP
\fBIPELATEXDIR\fP
the directory where \fBipetoipe\fP runs Pdflatex.

.TP
\fBIPELATEXPATH\fP
the directory containing pdflatex and xelatex.  If not set, they are
searched for on the path.

.TP
\fBIPEDEBUG\fP
set this to 1 for debugging output.

.SH AUTHOR
Otfried Cheong

.SH REPORTING BUGS
.ad l
Please report bugs using Ipe bugzilla at
.I "http://ipe.otfried.org/bugzilla.html"

.SH SEE ALSO
.ad l
Ipe is documented fully in
.IR "The Ipe Manual" ,
which is available online at
.I "http://ipe.otfried.org/manual/manual.html" .
